{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Monaco;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green115\blue0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf2 'Obtaining SC3'\cf0 \
\
The software is open source under the GNU GPL 3 and in a constant process of development. \
\
The full SC3 (with Server and language facilities) is currently available for Mac OS X, Linux and Windows.  \
\
As well as developing the kernel, new unit generator plug-ins can be written and many third-party class libraries are available in the SuperCollider language itself.  \
\
\
\
The main SuperCollider page is: \
http://supercollider.sourceforge.net/\
\
The easiest way to get hold of SC3 is from a binary download; the above site will give you easy links for current recommended versions for each operating system. \
\
Note that SuperCollider 3.6 and later has a common cross platform look and feel (there is a common SCIDE, and the graphical user interfaces use the Qt GUI library). SuperCollider 3.5  was much more diverse across platforms. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
There are some additional sources: \
\
An older page on Linux and SC:\
http://swiki.hfbk-hamburg.de:8888/MusicTechnology/478\
\
The latest source code of SuperCollider can be obtained using the git version management tool:\
http://supercollider.sourceforge.net/developers/\
So can attempt to build it yourself. This route is not recommended for beginners! The source is available under anonymous checkout from the version control system on github.\
 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}